Genesis Chapter 1


God createth Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, in six days.

1:1. In the beginning God created heaven, and earth.

1:2. And the earth was void and empty, and darkness was upon the face
of the deep; and the spirit of God moved over the waters.

1:3. And God said: Be light made. And light was made.

1:4. And God saw the light that it was good; and he divided the light
from the darkness.

1:5. And he called the light Day, and the darkness Night; and there was
evening and morning one day.

1:6. And God said: Let there be a firmament made amidst the waters: and
let it divide the waters from the waters.

A firmament. . .By this name is here understood the whole space between
the earth, and the highest stars. The lower part of which divideth the
waters that are upon the earth, from those that are above in the
clouds.

1:7. And God made a firmament, and divided the waters that were under
the firmament, from those that were above the firmament, and it was so.

1:8. And God called the firmament, Heaven; and the evening and morning
were the second day.

1:9. God also said; Let the waters that are under the heaven, be
gathered together into one place: and let the dry land appear. And it
was so done.

1:10. And God called the dry land, Earth; and the gathering together of
the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.

1:11. And he said: let the earth bring forth green herb, and such as
may seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind, which may
have seed in itself upon the earth. And it was so done.

1:12. And the earth brought forth the green herb, and such as yieldeth
seed according to its kind, and the tree that beareth fruit, having
seed each one according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

1:13. And the evening and the morning were the third day.

1:14. And God said: Let there be lights made in the firmament of
heaven, to divide the day and the night, and let them be for signs, and
for seasons, and for days and years:

1:15. To shine in the firmament of heaven, and to give light upon the
earth, and it was so done.

1:16. And God made two great lights: a greater light to rule the day;
and a lesser light to rule the night: and the stars.

Two great lights. . .God created on the first day, light, which being
moved from east to west, by its rising and setting, made morning and
evening. But on the fourth day he ordered and distributed this light,
and made the sun, moon, and stars. The moon, though much less than the
stars, is here called a great light, from its giving a far greater
light to the earth than any of them.

1:17. And he set them in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the
earth.

1:18. And to rule the day and the night, and to divide the light and
the darkness. And God saw that it was good.

1:19. And the evening and morning were the fourth day.

1:20. God also said: let the waters bring forth the creeping creature
having life, and the fowl that may fly over the earth under the
firmament of heaven.

1:21. And God created the great whales, and every living and moving
creature, which the waters brought forth, according to their kinds, and
every winged fowl according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

1:22. And he blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill the
waters of the sea: and let the birds be multiplied upon the earth.

1:23. And the evening and morning were the fifth day.

1:24. And God said: Let the earth bring forth the living creature in
its kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth,
according to their kinds. And it was so done.

1:25. And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds,
and cattle, and every thing that creepeth on the earth after its kind.
And God saw that it was good.

1:26. And he said: Let us make man to our image and likeness: and let
him have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air,
and the beasts, and the whole earth, and every creeping creature that
moveth upon the earth.

Let us make man to our image. . .This image of God in man, is not in the
body, but in the soul; which is a spiritual substance, endued with
understanding and free will. God speaketh here in the plural number, to
insinuate the plurality of persons in the Deity.

1:27. And God created man to his own image: to the image of God he
created him: male and female he created them.

1:28. And God blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill the
earth, and subdue it, and rule over the fishes of the sea, and the
fowls of the air, and all living creatures that move upon the earth.

Increase and multiply. . .This is not a precept, as some Protestant
controvertists would have it, but a blessing, rendering them fruitful;
for God had said the same words to the fishes, and birds, (ver. 22) who
were incapable of receiving a precept.

1:29. And God said: Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed
upon the earth, and all trees that have in themselves seed of their own
kind, to be your meat:

1:30. And to all beasts of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and
to all that move upon the earth, and wherein there is life, that they
may have to feed upon. And it was so done.

1:31. And God saw all the things that he had made, and they were very
good. And the evening and morning were the sixth day.



Genesis Chapter 2


God resteth on the seventh day and blesseth it. The earthly paradise,
in which God placeth man. He commandeth him not to eat of the tree of
knowledge. And formeth a woman of his rib.

2:1. So the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the furniture
of them.

2:2. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made: and
he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had done.

He rested, etc. . .That is, he ceased to make or create any new kinds of
things. Though, as our Lord tells us, John 5.17, "He still worketh",
viz., by conserving and governing all things, and creating souls.

2:3. And he blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because in it
he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

2:4. These are the generations of the heaven and the earth, when they
were created, in the day that the Lord God made the heaven and the
earth:

2:5. And every plant of the field before it sprung up in the earth, and
every herb of the ground before it grew: for the Lord God had not
rained upon the earth; and there was not a man to till the earth.

2:6. But a spring rose out of the earth, watering all the surface of
the earth.

2:7. And the Lord God formed man of the slime of the earth: and
breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a living
soul.

2:8. And the Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure from the
beginning: wherein he placed man whom he had formed.

2:9. And the Lord God brought forth of the ground all manner of trees,
fair to behold, and pleasant to eat of: the tree of life also in the
midst of paradise: and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

The tree of life. . .So called because it had that quality, that by
eating of the fruit of it, man would have been preserved in a constant
state of health, vigour, and strength, and would not have died at all.
The tree of knowledge. . .To which the deceitful serpent falsely
attributed the power of imparting a superior kind of knowledge, beyond
that which God was pleased to give.

2:10. And a river went out of the place of pleasure to water paradise,
which from thence is divided into four heads.

2:11. The name of the one is Phison: that is it which compasseth all
the land of Hevilath, where gold groweth.

2:12. And the gold of that land is very good: there is found bdellium,
and the onyx stone.

2:13. And the name of the second river is Gehon: the same is it that
compasseth all the land of Ethiopia.

2:14. And the name of the third river is Tigris: the same passeth along
by the Assyrians. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

2:15. And the Lord God took man, and put him into the paradise of
pleasure, to dress it, and to keep it.

2:16. And he commanded him, saying: Of every tree of paradise thou
shalt eat:

2:17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not
eat. For in what day soever thou shalt eat of it, thou shalt die the
death.

2:18. And the Lord God said: It is not good for man to be alone: let us
make him a help like unto himself.

2:19. And the Lord God having formed out of the ground all the beasts
of the earth, and all the fowls of the air, brought them to Adam to see
what he would call them: for whatsoever Adam called any living creature
the same is its name.

2:20. And Adam called all the beasts by their names, and all the fowls
of the air, and all the cattle of the field: but for Adam there was not
found a helper like himself.

2:21. Then the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon Adam: and when he was
fast asleep, he took one of his ribs, and filled up flesh for it.

2:22. And the Lord God built the rib which he took from Adam into a
woman: and brought her to Adam.

2:23. And Adam said: This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh; she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

2:24. Wherefore a man shall leave father and mother, and shall cleave
to his wife: and they shall be two in one flesh.

2:25. And they were both naked: to wit, Adam and his wife: and were not
ashamed.



Genesis Chapter 3


The serpent's craft. The fall of our first parents. Their punishment.
The promise of a Redeemer.

3:1. Now the serpent was more subtle than any of the beasts of the
earth which the Lord God had made. And he said to the woman: Why hath
God commanded you, that you should not eat of every tree of paradise?

3:2. And the woman answered him, saying: Of the fruit of the trees that
are in paradise we do eat:

3:3. But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of paradise,
God hath commanded us that we should not eat; and that we should not
touch it, lest perhaps we die.

3:4. And the serpent said to the woman: No, you shall not die the
death.

3:5. For God doth know that in what day soever you shall eat thereof,
your eyes shall be opened: and you shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil.

3:6. And the woman saw that the tree was good to eat, and fair to the
eyes, and delightful to behold: and she took of the fruit thereof, and
did eat, and gave to her husband, who did eat.

3:7. And the eyes of them both were opened: and when they perceived
themselves to be naked, they sewed together fig leaves, and made
themselves aprons.

And the eyes, etc. . .Not that they were blind before, (for the woman
saw that the tree was fair to the eyes, ver. 6.) nor yet that their
eyes were opened to any more perfect knowledge of good; but only to the
unhappy experience of having lost the good of original grace and
innocence, and incurred the dreadful evil of sin. From whence followed
a shame of their being naked; which they minded not before; because
being now stript of original grace, they quickly began to be subject to
the shameful rebellions of the flesh.

3:8. And when they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in paradise
at the afternoon air, Adam and his wife hid themselves from the face of
the Lord God, amidst the trees of paradise.

3:9. And the Lord God called Adam, and said to him: Where art thou?

3:10. And he said: I heard thy voice in paradise; and I was afraid,
because I was naked, and I hid myself.

3:11. And he said to him: And who hath told thee that thou wast naked,
but that thou hast eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
shouldst not eat?

3:12. And Adam said: The woman, whom thou gavest me to be my companion,
gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

3:13. And the Lord God said to the woman: Why hast thou done this? And
she answered: The serpent deceived me, and I did eat.

3:14. And the Lord God said to the serpent: Because thou hast done this
thing, thou art cursed among all cattle, and beasts of the earth: upon
thy breast shalt thou go, and earth shalt thou eat all the days of thy
life.

3:15. I will put enmities between thee and the woman, and thy seed and
her seed: she shall crush thy head, and thou shalt lie in wait for her
heel.

She shall crush. . .Ipsa, the woman; so divers of the fathers read this
place, conformably to the Latin: others read it ipsum, viz., the seed.
The sense is the same: for it is by her seed, Jesus Christ, that the
woman crushes the serpent's head.

3:16. To the woman also he said: I will multiply thy sorrows, and thy
conceptions: in sorrow shalt thou bring forth children, and thou shalt
be under thy husband's power, and he shall have dominion over thee.

3:17. And to Adam he said: Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee, that
thou shouldst not eat, cursed is the earth in thy work: with labour and
toil shalt thou eat thereof all the days of thy life.

3:18. Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt
eat the herbs of the earth.

3:19. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return to
the earth out of which thou wast taken: for dust thou art, and into
dust thou shalt return.

3:20. And Adam called the name of his wife Eve: because she was the
mother of all the living.

3:21. And the Lord God made for Adam and his wife garments of skins,
and clothed them.

3:22. And he said: Behold Adam is become as one of us, knowing good and
evil: now therefore lest perhaps he put forth his hand and take also of
the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever.

Behold Adam, etc. . .This was spoken by way of reproaching him with his
pride, in affecting a knowledge that might make him like to God.

3:23. And the Lord God sent him out of the paradise of pleasure, to
till the earth from which he was taken.

3:24. And he cast out Adam: and placed before the paradise of pleasure
Cherubims, and a flaming sword, turning every way, to keep the way of
the tree of life.



Genesis Chapter 4


The history of Cain and Abel.

4:1. And Adam knew Eve his wife; who conceived and brought forth Cain,
saying: I have gotten a man through God.

4:2. And again she brought forth his brother Abel. And Abel was a
shepherd, and Cain a husbandman.

4:3. And it came to pass after many days, that Cain offered, of the
fruits of the earth, gifts to the Lord.

4:4. Abel also offered of the firstlings of his flock, and of their
fat: and the Lord had respect to Abel, and to his offerings.

Had respect. . .That is, shewed his acceptance of his sacrifice (as
coming from a heart full of devotion): and that, as we may suppose, by
some visible token, such as sending fire from heaven upon his
offerings.

4:5. But to Cain and his offerings he had no respect: and Cain was
exceeding angry, and his countenance fell.

4:6. And the Lord said to him: Why art thou angry? and why is thy
countenance fallen?

4:7. If thou do well, shalt thou not receive? but if ill, shall not sin
forthwith be present at the door? but the lust thereof shall be under
thee, and thou shalt have dominion over it.

4:8. And Cain said to Abel his brother: Let us go forth abroad. And
when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and
slew him.

4:9. And the Lord said to Cain: Where is thy brother Abel? And he
answered: I know not: am I my brother's keeper?

4:10. And he said to him: What hast thou done? the voice of thy
brother's blood crieth to me from the earth.

4:11. Now therefore cursed shalt thou be upon the earth, which hath
opened her mouth and received the blood of thy brother at thy hand.

4:12. When thou shalt till it, it shall not yield to thee its fruit: a
fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be upon the earth.

4:13. And Cain said to the Lord: My iniquity is greater than that I may
deserve pardon.

4:14. Behold thou dost cast me out this day from the face of the earth,
and from thy face I shall be hid, and I shall be a vagabond and a
fugitive on the earth: every one therefore that findeth me, shall kill
me.

Every one that findeth me shall kill me. . .His guilty conscience made
him fear his own brothers and nephews; of whom, by this time, there
might be a good number upon the earth; which had now endured near 130
years; as may be gathered from Gen. 5.3, compared with chap. 4.25,
though in the compendious account given in the scriptures, only Cain
and Abel are mentioned.

4:15. And the Lord said to him: No, it shall not so be: but whosoever
shall kill Cain, shall be punished sevenfold. And the Lord set a mark
upon Cain, that whosoever found him should not kill him.

Set a mark, etc. . .The more common opinion of the interpreters of holy
writ supposes this mark to have been a trembling of the body; or a
horror and consternation in his countenance.

4:16. And Cain went out from the face of the Lord, and dwelt as a
fugitive on the earth at the east side of Eden.

4:17. And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived, and brought forth
Henoch: and he built a city, and called the name thereof by the name of
his son Henoch.

His wife. . .She was a daughter of Adam, and Cain's own sister; God
dispensing with such marriages in the beginning of the world, as
mankind could not otherwise be propagated. He built a city, viz. . .In
process of time, when his race was multiplied, so as to be numerous
enough to people it. For in the many hundred years he lived, his race
might be multiplied even to millions.

4:18. And Henoch begot Irad, and Irad begot Maviael, and Maviael begot
Mathusael, and Mathusael begot Lamech,

4:19. Who took two wives: the name of the one was Ada, and the name of
the other Sella.

4:20. And Ada brought forth Jabel: who was the father of such as dwell
in tents, and of herdsmen.

4:21. And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of them that
play upon the harp and the organs.

4:22. Sella also brought forth Tubalcain, who was a hammerer and
artificer in every work of brass and iron. And the sister of Tubalcain
was Noema.

4:23. And Lamech said to his wives Ada and Sella: Hear my voice, ye
wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech: for I have slain a man to the
wounding of myself, and a stripling to my own bruising.

I have slain a man, etc. . .It is the tradition of the Hebrews, that
Lamech in hunting slew Cain, mistaking him for a wild beast; and that
having discovered what he had done, he beat so unmercifully the youth,
by whom he was led into that mistake, that he died of the blows.

4:24. Sevenfold vengeance shall be taken for Cain: but for Lamech
seventy times sevenfold.

4:25. Adam also knew his wife again: and she brought forth a son, and
called his name Seth, saying: God hath given me another seed for Abel,
whom Cain slew.

4:26. But to Seth also was born a son, whom he called Enos: this man
began to call upon the name of the Lord.

Began to call upon, etc. . .Not that Adam and Seth had not called upon
God, before the birth of Enos; but that Enos used more solemnity in the
worship and invocation of God.



Genesis Chapter 5


The genealogy, age, and death of the Patriarchs, from Adam to Noe. The
translation of Henoch.

5:1. This is the book of the generation of Adam. In the day that God
created man, he made him to the likeness of God.

5:2. He created them male and female; and blessed them: and called
their name Adam, in the day when they were created.

5:3. And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and begot a son to his
own image and likeness, and called his name Seth.

5:4. And the days of Adam, after he begot Seth, were eight hundred
years: and he begot sons and daughters.

5:5. And all the time that Adam lived, came to nine hundred and thirty
years, and he died.

5:6. Seth also lived a hundred and five years, and begot Enos.

5:7. And Seth lived after he begot Enos, eight hundred and seven years,
and begot sons and daughters.

5:8. And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years, and
he died.

5:9. And Enos lived ninety years, and begot Cainan.

5:10. After whose birth he lived eight hundred and fifteen years, and
begot sons and daughters.

5:11. And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years, and he
died.

5:12. And Cainan lived seventy years, and begot Malaleel.

5:13. And Cainan lived after he begot Malaleel, eight hundred and forty
years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:14. And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years, and
he died.

5:15. And Malaleel lived sixty-five years and begot Jared.

5:16. And Malaleel lived after he begot Jared, eight hundred and thirty
years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:17. And all the days of Malaleel were eight hundred and ninety-five
years, and he died.

5:18. And Jared lived a hundred and sixty-two years, and begot Henoch.

5:19. And Jared lived after he begot Henoch, eight hundred years, and
begot sons and daughters.

5:20. And all the days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty-two years,
and he died.

5:21. And Henoch lived sixty-five years, and begot Mathusala.

5:22. And Henoch walked with God: and lived after he begot Mathusala,
three hundred years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:23. And all the days of Henoch were three hundred and sixty-five
years.

5:24. And he walked with God, and was seen no more: because God took
him.

5:25. And Mathusala lived a hundred and eighty-seven years, and begot
Lamech.

5:26. And Mathlusala lived after he begot Lamech, seven hundred and
eighty-two years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:27. And all the days of Mathusala were nine hundred and sixty-nine
years, and he died.

5:28. And Lamech lived a hundred and eighty-two years, and begot a son.

5:29. And he called his name Noe, saying: This same shall comfort us
from the works and labours of our hands on the earth, which the Lord
hath cursed.

5:30. And Lamech lived after he begot Noe, five hundred and ninety-five
years, and begot sons and daughters.

5:31. And all the days of Lamech came to seven hundred and
seventy-seven years, and he died. And Noe, when he was five hundred
years old, begot Sem, Cham, and Japheth.



Genesis Chapter 6


Man's sin is the cause of the deluge. Noe is commanded to build the
ark.

6:1. And after that men began to be multiplied upon the earth, and
daughters were born to them,

6:2. The sons of God seeing the daughters of men, that they were fair,
took to themselves wives of all which they chose.

The sons of God. . .The descendants of Seth and Enos are here called
sons of God from their religion and piety: whereas the ungodly race of
Cain, who by their carnal affections lay grovelling upon the earth, are
called the children of men. The unhappy consequence of the former
marrying with the latter, ought to be a warning to Christians to be
very circumspect in their marriages; and not to suffer themselves to be
determined in their choice by their carnal passion, to the prejudice of
virtue or religion.

6:3. And God said: My spirit shall not remain in man for ever, because
he is flesh, and his days shall be a hundred and twenty years.

His days shall be, etc. . .The meaning is, that man's days, which before
the flood were usually 900 years, should now be reduced to 120 years.
Or rather, that God would allow men this term of 120 years, for their
repentance and conversion, before he would send the deluge.

6:4. Now giants were upon the earth in those days. For after the sons
of God went in to the daughters of men, and they brought forth
children, these are the mighty men of old, men of renown.

Giants. . .It is likely the generality of men before the flood were of a
gigantic stature in comparison with what men now are. But these here
spoken of are called giants, as being not only tall in stature, but
violent and savage in their dispositions, and mere monsters of cruelty
and lust.

6:5. And God seeing that the wickedness of men was great on the earth,
and that all the thought of their heart was bent upon evil at all
times,

6:6. It repented him that he had made man on the earth. And being
touched inwardly with sorrow of heart,

It repented him, etc. . .God, who is unchangeable, is not capable of
repentance, grief, or any other passion. But these expressions are used
to declare the enormity of the sins of men, which was so provoking as
to determine their Creator to destroy these his creatures, whom before
he had so much favoured.

6:7. He said: I will destroy man, whom I have created, from the face of
the earth, from man even to beasts, from the creeping thing even to the
fowls of the air, for it repenteth me that I have made them.

6:8. But Noe found grace before the Lord.

6:9. These are the generations of Noe: Noe was a just and perfect man
in his generations, he walked with God.

6:10. And he begot three sons, Sem, Cham, and Japheth.

6:11. And the earth was corrupted before God, and was filled with
iniquity.

6:12. And when God had seen that the earth was corrupted (for all flesh
had corrupted its way upon the earth),

6:13. He said to Noe: The end of all flesh is come before me, the earth
is filled with iniquity through them, and I will destroy them with the
earth.

6:14. Make thee an ark of timber planks: thou shalt make little rooms
in the ark, and thou shalt pitch it within and without.

6:15. And thus shalt thou make it. The length of the ark shall be three
hundred cubits: the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it
thirty cubits.

Three hundred cubits, etc. . .The ark, according to the dimensions here
set down, contained four hundred and fifty thousand square cubits;
which was more than enough to contain all the kinds of living
creatures, with all necessary provisions: even supposing the cubits
here spoken of to have been only a foot and a half each, which was the
least kind of cubits.

6:16. Thou shalt make a window in the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou
finish the top of it: and the door of the ark thou shalt set in the
side: with lower, middle chambers, and third stories shalt thou make
it.

6:17. Behold, I will bring the waters of a great flood upon the earth,
to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life under heaven. All
things that are in the earth shall be consumed.

6:18. And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shalt enter
into the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and the wives of thy
sons with thee.

6:19. And of every living creature of all flesh, thou shalt bring two
of a sort into the ark, that they may live with thee: of the male sex,
and the female.

6:20. Of fowls according to their kind, and of beasts in their kind,
and of every thing that creepeth on the earth according to its kind:
two of every sort shall go in with thee, that they may live.

6:21. Thou shalt take unto thee of all food that may be eaten, and thou
shalt lay it up with thee: and it shall be food for thee and them.

6:22. And Noe did all things which God commanded him.



Genesis Chapter 7


Noe with his family go into the ark. The deluge overflows the earth.

7:1. And the Lord said to him: Go in, thou and all thy house, into the
ark: for thee I have seen just before me in this generation.

7:2. Of all clean beasts take seven and seven, the male and the female.

Of all clean. . .The distinction of clean and unclean beasts appears to
have been made before the law of Moses, which was not promulgated till
the year of the world 2514.

7:3. But of the beasts that are unclean two and two, the male and the
female. Of the fowls also of the air seven and seven, the male and the
female: that seed may be saved upon the face of the whole earth.

7:4. For yet a while, and after seven days, I will rain upon the earth
forty days and forty nights: and I will destroy every substance that I
have made, from the face of the earth.

7:5. And Noe did all things which the Lord had commanded him.

7:6. And he was six hundred years old, when the waters of the flood
overflowed the earth.

7:7. And Noe went in and his sons, his wife and the wives of his sons
with him into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

7:8. And of beasts clean and unclean, and of fowls, and of every thing
that moveth upon the earth,

7:9. Two and two went in to Noe into the ark, male and female, as the
Lord had commanded Noe.

7:10. And after the seven days were passed, the waters of the flood
overflowed the earth.

7:11. In the six hundredth year of the life of Noe, in the second
month, in the seventeenth day of the month, all the fountains of the
great deep were broken up, and the floodgates of heaven were opened:

7:12. And the rain fell upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

7:13. In the selfsame day Noe, and Sem, and Cham, and Japheth, his
sons: his wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, went into
the ark.

7:14. They and every beast according to its kind, and all the cattle in
their kind, and every thing that moveth upon the earth, according to
its kind, and every fowl according to its kind, all birds, and all that
fly,

7:15. Went in to Noe into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein
was the breath of life.

7:16. And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
God had commanded him: and the Lord shut him in on the outside.

7:17. And the flood was forty days upon the earth: and the waters
increased, and lifted up the ark on high from the earth.

7:18. For they overflowed exceedingly: and filled all on the face of
the earth: and the ark was carried upon the waters.

7:19. And the waters prevailed beyond measure upon the earth: and all
the high mountains under the whole heaven were covered.

7:20. The water was fifteen cubits higher than the mountains which it
covered.

7:21. And all flesh was destroyed that moved upon the earth, both of
fowl and of cattle, and of beasts, and of all creeping things that
creep upon the earth: and all men.

7:22. And all things wherein there is the breath of life on the earth,
died.

7:23. And he destroyed all the substance that was upon the earth, from
man even to beast, and the creeping things and fowls of the air: and
they were destroyed from the earth: and Noe only remained, and they
that were with him in the ark.

7:24. And the waters prevailed upon the earth a hundred and fifty days.



Genesis Chapter 8


The deluge ceaseth. Noe goeth out of the ark, and offereth a sacrifice.
God's covenant to him.

8:1. And God remembered Noe, and all the living creatures, and all the
cattle which were with him in the ark, and brought a wind upon the
earth, and the waters were abated:

8:2. The fountains also of the deep, and the floodgates of heaven, were
shut up, and the rain from heaven was restrained.

8:3. And the waters returned from off the earth going and coming: and
they began to be abated after a hundred and fifty days.

8:4. And the ark rested in the seventh month, the seven and twentieth
day of the month, upon the mountains of Armenia.

8:5. And the waters were going and decreasing until the tenth month:
for in the tenth month, the first day of the month, the tops of the
mountains appeared.

8:6. And after that forty days were passed, Noe opening the window of
the ark, which he had made, sent forth a raven:

8:7. Which went forth and did not return, till the waters were dried up
upon the earth.

Did not return. . .The raven did not return into the ark; but (as it may
be gathered from the Hebrew) went to and fro; sometimes going to the
mountains, where it found carcasses to feed on: and other times
returning, to rest upon the top of the ark.

8:8. He sent forth also a dove after him, to see if the waters had now
ceased upon the face of the earth.

8:9. But she not finding where her foot might rest, returned to him
into the ark: for the waters were upon the whole earth: and he put
forth his hand, and caught her, and brought her into the ark.

8:10. And having waited yet seven other days, he again sent forth the
dove out of the ark.

8:11. And she came to him in the evening carrying a bough of an olive
tree, with green leaves, in her mouth. Noe therefore understood that
the waters were ceased upon the earth.

8:12. And he stayed yet other seven days: and he sent forth the dove,
which returned not any more unto him.

8:13. Therefore in the six hundredth and first year, the first month,
the first day of the month, the waters were lessened upon the earth,
and Noe opening the covering of the ark, looked, and saw that the face
of the earth was dried.

8:14. In the second month, the seven and twentieth day of the month,
the earth was dried.

8:15. And God spoke to Noe, saying:

8:16. Go out of the ark, thou and thy wife, thy sons and the wives of
thy sons with thee.

8:17. All living things that are with thee of all flesh, as well in
fowls as in beasts, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth,
bring out with thee, and go ye upon the earth: increase and multiply
upon it.

8:18. So Noe went out, he and his sons: his wife, and the wives of his
sons with him.

8:19. And all living things, and cattle, and creeping things that creep
upon the earth, according to their kinds went out of the ark.

8:20. And Noe built an altar unto the Lord: and taking of all cattle
and fowls that were clean, offered holocausts upon the altar.

Holocausts,. . .or whole burnt offerings. In which the whole victim was
consumed by fire upon God's altar, and no part was reserved for the use
of priest or people.

8:21. And the Lord smelled a sweet savour, and said: I will no more
curse the earth for the sake of man: for the imagination and thought of
man's heart are prone to evil from his youth: therefore I will no more
destroy every living soul as I have done.

Smelled, etc. . .A figurative expression, denoting that God was well
pleased with the sacrifices which his servant offered.

8:22. All the days of the earth, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat,
summer and winter, night and day, shall not cease.



Genesis Chapter 9


God blesseth Noe: forbiddeth blood, and promiseth never more to destroy
the world by water. The blessing of Sem and Japheth.

9:1. And God blessed Noe and his sons. And he said to them: Increase,
and multiply, and fill the earth.

9:2. And let the fear and dread of you be upon all the beasts of the
earth, and upon all the fowls of the air, and all that move upon the
earth: all the fishes of the sea are delivered into your hand.

9:3. And every thing that moveth, and liveth shall be meat for you:
even as the green herbs have I delivered them all to you:

9:4. Saving that flesh with blood you shall not eat.

9:5. For I will require the blood of your lives at the hand of every
beast, and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man, and of his
brother, will I require the life of man.

9:6. Whosoever shall shed man's blood, his blood shall be shed: for man
was made to the image of God.

9:7. But increase you and multiply, and go upon the earth and fill it.

9:8. Thus also said God to Noe, and to his sons with him:

9:9. Behold I will establish my covenant with you, and with your seed
after you:

9:10. And with every living soul that is with you, as well in all
birds, as in cattle and beasts of the earth, that are come forth out of
the ark, and in all the beasts of the earth.

9:11. I will establish my covenant with you, and all flesh shall be no
more destroyed with the waters of a flood, neither shall there be from
henceforth a flood to waste the earth.

9:12. And God said: This is the sign of the covenant which I give
between me and you, and to every living soul that is with you, for
perpetual generations.

9:13. I will set my bow in the clouds, and it shall be the sign of a
covenant between me and between the earth.

9:14. And when I shall cover the sky with clouds, my bow shall appear
in the clouds:

9:15. And I will remember my covenant with you, and with every living
soul that beareth flesh: and there shall no more be waters of a flood
to destroy all flesh.

9:16. And the bow shall be in the clouds, and I shall see it, and shall
remember the everlasting covenant, that was made between God and every
living soul of all flesh which is upon the earth.

9:17. And God said to Noe: This shall be the sign of the covenant,
which I have established, between me and all flesh upon the earth.

9:18. And the sons of Noe, who came out of the ark, were Sem, Cham, and
Japheth: and Cham is the father of Chanaan.

9:19. These three are the sons of Noe: and from these was all mankind
spread over the whole earth.

9:20. And Noe a husbandman began to till the ground, and planted a
vineyard.

9:21. And drinking of the wine was made drunk, and was uncovered in his
tent.

Drunk. . .Noe by the judgment of the fathers was not guilty of sin, in
being overcome by wine: because he knew not the strength of it.

9:22. Which when Cham the father of Chanaan had seen, to wit, that his
father's nakedness was uncovered, he told it to his two brethren
without.

9:23. But Sem and Japheth put a cloak upon their shoulders, and going
backward, covered the nakedness of their father: and their faces were
turned away, and they saw not their father's nakedness.

Covered the nakedness. . .Thus, as St. Gregory takes notice L. 35;
Moral. c. 22, we ought to cover the nakedness, that is, the sins, of
our spiritual parents and superiors.

9:24. And Noe awaking from the wine, when he had learned what his
younger son had done to him,

9:25. He said: Cursed be Chanaan, a servant of servants shall he be
unto his brethren.

Cursed be Chanaan. . .The curses, as well as the blessings, of the
patriarchs, were prophetical: And this in particular is here recorded
by Moses, for the children of Israel, who were to possess the land of
Chanaan. But why should Chanaan be cursed for his father's faults? The
Hebrews answer, that he being then a boy, was the first that saw his
grandfather's nakedness, and told his father Cham of it; and joined
with him in laughing at it: which drew upon him, rather than upon the
rest of the children of Cham, this prophetical curse.

9:26. And he said: Blessed be the Lord God of Sem, be Chanaan his
servant.

9:27. May God enlarge Japheth, and may he dwell in the tents of Sem,
and Chanaan be his servant.

9:28. And Noe lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

9:29. And all his days were in the whole nine hundred and fifty years:
and he died.



Genesis Chapter 10


The genealogy of the children of Noe, by whom the world was peopled
after the flood.

10:1. These are the generations of the sons of Noe: Sem, Cham, and
Japheth: and unto them sons were born after the flood.

10:2. The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and
Thubal, and Mosoch, and Thiras.

10:3. And the sons of Gomer: Ascenez and Riphath and Thogorma.

10:4. And the sons of Javan: Elisa and Tharsis, Cetthim and Dodanim.

10:5. By these were divided the islands of the Gentiles in their lands,
every one according to his tongue and their families in their nations.

The islands. . .So the Hebrews called all the remote countries, to which
they went by ships from Judea, to Greece, Italy, Spain, etc.

10:6. And the Sons of Cham: Chus, and Mesram, and Phuth, and Chanaan.

10:7. And the sons of Chus: Saba, and Hevila, and Sabatha, and Regma,
and Sabatacha. The sons of Regma: Saba, and Dadan.

10:8. Now Chus begot Nemrod: he began to be mighty on the earth.

10:9. And he was a stout hunter before the Lord. Hence came a proverb:
Even as Nemrod the stout hunter before the Lord.

A stout hunter. . .Not of beasts but of men: whom by violence and
tyranny he brought under his dominion. And such he was, not only in the
opinion of men, but before the Lord, that is, in his sight who cannot
be deceived.

10:10. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon, and Arach, and
Achad, and Chalanne in the land of Sennaar.

10:11. Out of that land came forth Assur, and built Ninive, and the
streets of the city, and Chale.

10:12. Resen also between Ninive and Chale: this is the great city.

10:13. And Mesraim begot Ludim, and Anamim and Laabim, Nephthuim.

10:14. And Phetrusim, and Chasluim; of whom came forth the Philistines,
and the Capthorim.

10:15. And Chanaan begot Sidon his firstborn, the Hethite,

10:16. And the Jebusite, and the Amorrhite, and the Gergesite.

10:17. The Hevite and Aracite: the Sinite,

10:18. And the Aradian, the Samarite, and the Hamathite: and afterwards
the families of the Chanaanites were spread abroad.

10:19. And the limits of Chanaan were from Sidon as one comes to Gerara
even to Gaza, until thou enter Sodom and Gomorrha, and Adama, and
Seboim even to Lesa.

10:20. These are the children of Cham in their kindreds and tongues,
and generations, and lands, and nations.

10:21. Of Sem also the father of all the children of Heber, the elder
brother of Japheth, sons were born.

10:22. The sons of Sem: Elam and Assur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and
Aram.

10:23. The sons of Aram: Us, and Hull, and Gether; and Mes.

10:24. But Arphaxad begot Sale, of whom was born Heber.

10:25. And to Heber were born two sons: the name of the one was Phaleg,
because in his days was the earth divided: and his brother's name
Jectan.

10:26. Which Jectan begot Elmodad, and Saleph, and Asarmoth, Jare,

10:27. And Aduram, and Uzal, and Decla,

10:28. And Ebal, and Abimael, Saba,

10:29. And Ophir, and Hevila, and Jobab. All these were the sons of
Jectan.

10:30. And their dwelling was from Messa as we go on as far as Sephar,
a mountain in the east.

10:31. These are the children of Sem according to their kindreds and
tongues, and countries in their nations.

10:32. These are the families of Noe, according to their people and
nations. By these were the nations divided on the earth after the
flood.



Genesis Chapter 11


The tower of Babel. The confusion of tongues. The genealogy of Sem down
to Abram.

11:1. And the earth was of one tongue, and of the same speech.

11:2. And when they removed from the east, they found a plain in the
land of Sennaar, and dwelt in it.

11:3. And each one said to his neighbour: Come let us make brick, and
bake them with fire. And they had brick instead of stones, and slime
instead of mortar:

11:4. And they said: Come, let us make a city and a tower, the top
whereof may reach to heaven; and let us make our name famous before we
be scattered abroad into all lands.

11:5. And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the
children of Adam were building.

11:6. And he said: Behold, it is one people, and all have one tongue:
and they have begun to do this, neither will they leave off from their
designs, till they accomplish them in deed.

11:7. Come ye, therefore, let us go down, and there confound their
tongue, that they may not understand one another's speech.

11:8. And so the Lord scattered them from that place into all lands,
and they ceased to build the city.

11:9. And therefore the name thereof was called Babel, because there
the language of the whole earth was confounded: and from thence the
Lord scattered them abroad upon the face of all countries.

Babel. . .That is, confusion.

11:10. These are the generations of Sem: Sem was a hundred years old
when he begot Arphaxad, two years after the flood.

11:11. And Sem lived after he begot Arphaxad, five hundred years, and
begot sons and daughters.

11:12. And Arphaxad lived thirty-five years, and begot Sale.

11:13. And Arphaxad lived after he begot Sale, three hundred and three
years, and begot sons and daughters.

11:14. Sale also lived thirty years, and begot Heber.

11:15. And Sale lived after he begot Heber, four hundred and three
years: and begot sons and daughters.

11:16. And Heber lived thirty-four years, and begot Phaleg.

11:17. And Heber lived after he begot Phaleg, four hundred and thirty
years: and begot sons and daughters.

11:18. Phaleg also lived thirty years, and begot Reu.

11:19. And Phaleg lived after he begot Reu, two hundred and nine years,
and begot sons and daughters.

11:20. And Reu lived thirty-two years, and begot Sarug.

11:21. And Reu lived after he begot Sarug, two hundred and seven years,
and begot sons and daughters.

11:22. And Sarug lived thirty years, and begot Nachor.

11:23. And Sarug lived after he begot Nachor, two hundred years, and
begot sons and daughters.

11:24. And Nachor lived nine and twenty years, and begot Thare.

11:25. And Nachor lived after he begot Thare, a hundred and nineteen
years, and begot sons and daughters.

11:26. And Thare lived seventy years, and begot Abram, and Nachor, and
Aran.

11:27. And these are the generations of Thare: Thare begot Abram,
Nachor, and Aran. And Aran begot Lot.

11:28. And Aran died before Thare his father, in the land of his
nativity in Ur of the Chaldees.

11:29. And Abram and Nachor married wives: the name of Abram's wife was
Sarai: and the name of Nachor's wife, Melcha, the daughter of Aran,
father of Melcha and father of Jescha.

11:30. And Sarai was barren, and had no children.

11:31. And Thare took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Aran, his son's
son, and Sarai his daughter in law, the wife of Abram his son, and
brought them out of Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Chanaan:
and they came as far as Haran, and dwelt there.

11:32. And the days of Thare were two hundred and five years, and he
died in Haran.



Genesis Chapter 12


The call of Abram, and the promise made to him. He sojourneth in
Chanaan, and then by occasion of a famine, goeth down to Egypt.

12:1. And the Lord said to Abram: Go forth out of thy country, and from
thy kindred, and out of thy father's house, and come into the land
which I shall shew thee.

12:2. And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee,
and magnify thy name, and thou shalt be blessed.

12:3. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse
thee, and IN THEE shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

12:4. So Abram went out as the Lord had commanded him, and Lot went
with him: Abram was seventy-five years old when he went forth from
Haran.

12:5. And he took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all
the substance which they had gathered, and the souls which they had
gotten in Haran: and they went out to go into the land of Chanaan. And
when they were come into it,

12:6. Abram passed through the country unto the place of Sichem, as far
as the noble vale: now the Chanaanite was at that time in the land.

12:7. And the Lord appeared to Abram, and said to him: To thy seed will
I give this land. And he built there an altar to the Lord, who had
appeared to him.

12:8. And passing on from thence to a mountain, that was on the east
side of Bethel, he there pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west,
and Hai on the east: he built there also an altar to the Lord, and
called upon his name.

12:9. And Abram went forward, going and proceeding on to the south.

12:10. And there came a famine in the country: and Abram went down into
Egypt, to sojourn there: for the famine was very grievous in the land.

12:11. And when he was near to enter into Egypt, he said to Sarai his
wife: I know that thou art a beautiful woman:

12:12. And that when the Egyptians shall see thee, they will say: She
is his wife: and they will kill me, and keep thee.

12:13. Say, therefore, I pray thee, that thou art my sister: that I may
be well used for thee, and that my soul may live for thy sake.

My sister. . .This was no lie; because she was his niece, being daughter
to his brother Aran, and therefore, in the style of the Hebrews, she
might truly be called his sister, as Lot is called Abram's brother,
Gen. 14.14. See Gen. 20.12.

12:14. And when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians saw the woman
that she was very beautiful.

12:15. And the princes told Pharao, and praised her before him: and the
woman was taken into the house of Pharao.

12:16. And they used Abram well for her sake. And he had sheep and oxen
and he asses, and men servants, and maid servants, and she asses, and
camels.

12:17. But the Lord scourged Pharao and his house with most grievous
stripes for Sarai, Abram's wife.

12:18. And Pharao called Abram, and said to him: What is this that thou
hast done to me? Why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?

12:19. For what cause didst thou say, she was thy sister, that I might
take her to my wife? Now therefore there is thy wife, take her, and go
thy way.

12:20. And Pharao gave his men orders concerning Abram: and they led
him away and his wife, and all that he had.



Genesis Chapter 13


Abram and Lot part from each other. God's promise to Abram.

13:1. And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife, and all that he
had, and Lot with him into the south.

13:2. And he was very rich in possession of gold and silver.

13:3. And he returned by the way, that he came, from the south to
Bethel, to the place where before he had pitched his tent between
Bethel and Hai,

13:4. In the place of the altar which he had made before, and there he
called upon the name of the Lord.

13:5. But Lot also, who was with Abram, had flocks of sheep, and herds
of beasts, and tents.

13:6. Neither was the land able to bear them, that they might dwell
together: for their substance was great, and they could not dwell
together.

13:7. Whereupon also there arose a strife between the herdsmen of Abram
and of Lot. And at that time the Chanaanite and the Pherezite dwelled
in that country.

13:8. Abram therefore said to Lot: Let there be no quarrel, I beseech
thee, between me and thee, and between my herdsmen and thy herdsmen:
for we are brethren.

13:9. Behold the whole land is before thee: depart from me, I pray
thee: if thou wilt go to the left hand, I will take the right: if thou
choose the right hand, I will pass to the left.

13:10. And Lot lifting up his eyes, saw all the country about the
Jordan, which was watered throughout, before the Lord destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrha, as the paradise of the Lord, and like Egypt as one comes
to Segor.

13:11. And Lot chose to himself the country about the Jordan, and he
departed from the east: and they were separated one brother from the
other.

13:12. Abram dwelt in the land of Chanaan: and Lot abode in the towns,
that were about the Jordan, and dwelt in Sodom.

13:13. And the men of Sodom were very wicked, and sinners before the
face of the Lord beyond measure.

13:14. And the Lord said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him:
Lift up thy eyes, and look from the place wherein thou now art, to the
north and to the south, to the east and to the west.

13:15. All the land which thou seest, I will give to thee, and to thy
seed for ever.

13:16. And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: if any man be
able to number the dust of the earth, he shall be able to number thy
seed also.

13:17. Arise and walk through the land in the length, and the breadth
thereof: for I will give it to thee.

13:18. So Abram removing his tent, came, and dwelt by the vale of
Mambre, which is in Hebron: and he built there an altar to the Lord.



Genesis Chapter 14


The expedition of the four kings; the victory of Abram; he is blessed
by Melchisedech.

14:1. And it came to pass at that time, that Amraphel, king of Sennaar,
and Arioch, king of Pontus, and Chodorlahomor, king of the Elamites,
and Thadal, king of nations,

14:2. Made war against Bara, king of Sodom, and against Bersa, king of
Gomorrha, and against Sennaab, king of Adama, and against Semeber, king
of Seboim, and against the king of Bala, which is Segor.

14:3. All these came together into the woodland vale, which now is the
salt sea.

14:4. For they had served Chodorlahomor twelve years, and in the
thirteenth year they revolted from him.

14:5. And in the fourteenth year came Chodorlahomor, and the kings that
were with him: and they smote the Raphaim in Astarothcarnaim, and the
Zuzim with them, and the Emim in Save of Cariathaim.

14:6. And the Chorreans in the mountains of Seir, even to the plains of
Pharan, which is in the wilderness.

14:7. And they returned, and came to the fountain of Misphat, the same
is Cades: and they smote all the country of the Amalecites, and the
Amorrhean that dwelt in Asasonthamar.

14:8. And the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrha, and the king of
Adama, and the king of Seboim, and the king of Bala, which is Segor,
went out: and they set themselves against them in battle array, in the
woodland vale:

14:9. To wit, against Chodorlahomor king of the Elamites, and Thadal
king of nations, and Amraphel king of Sennaar, and Arioch king of
Pontus: four kings against five.

14:10. Now the woodland vale had many pits of slime. And the king of
Sodom, and the king of Gomorrha turned their backs, and were overthrown
there: and they that remained, fled to the mountain.

Of slime. Bituminis. . .This was a kind of pitch, which served for
mortar in the building of Babel, Gen. 11.3, and was used by Noe in
pitching the ark.

14:11. And they took all the substance of the Sodomites, and
Gomorrhites, and all their victuals, and went their way:

14:12. And Lot also, the son of Abram's brother, who dwelt in Sodom,
and his substance.

14:13. And behold one, that had escaped, told Abram the Hebrew, who
dwelt in the vale of Mambre the Amorrhite, the brother of Escol, and
the brother of Aner: for these had made a league with Abram.

14:14. Which when Abram had heard, to wit, that his brother Lot was
taken, he numbered of the servants born in his house, three hundred and
eighteen, well appointed: and pursued them to Dan.

14:15. And dividing his company, he rushed upon them in the night, and
defeated them: and pursued them as far as Hoba, which is on the left
hand of Damascus.

14:16. And he brought back all the substance, and Lot his brother, with
his substance, the women also, and the people.

14:17. And the king of Sodom went out to meet him, after he returned
from the slaughter of Chodorlahomor, and of the kings that were with
him in the vale of Save, which is the king's vale.

14:18. But Melchisedech, the king of Salem, bringing forth bread and
wine, for he was the priest of the most high God,

14:19. Blessed him, and said: Blessed be Abram by the most high God,
who created heaven and earth.

14:20. And blessed be the most high God, by whose protection, the
enemies are in thy hands. And he gave him the tithes of all.

14:21. And the king of Sodom said to Abram: Give me the persons, and
the rest take to thyself.

14:22. And he answered him: I lift up my hand to the Lord God the most
high, the possessor of heaven and earth,

14:23. That from the very woof thread unto the shoe latchet, I will not
take of any things that are thine, lest thou say: I have enriched
Abram.

14:24. Except such things as the young men have eaten, and the shares
of the men that came with me, Aner, Escol, and Mambre: these shall take
their shares.



Genesis Chapter 15


God promiseth seed to Abram. His faith, sacrifice and vision.

15:1. Now when these things were done, the word of the Lord came to
Abram by a vision, saying: Fear not, Abram, I am thy protector, and thy
reward exceeding great.

15:2. And Abram said: Lord God, what wilt thou give me? I shall go
without children: and the son of the steward of my house is this
Damascus Eliezer.

15:3. And Abram added: But to me thou hast not given seed: and lo my
servant born in my house, shall be my heir.

15:4. And immediately the word of the Lord came to him, saying : He
shall not be thy heir: but he that shall come out of thy bowels, him
shalt thou have for thy heir.

15:5. And he brought him forth abroad, and said to him: Look up to
heaven and number the stars if thou canst. And he said to him: So shall
thy seed be.

15:6. Abram believed God, and it was reputed to him unto justice.

15:7. And he said to him: I am the Lord who brought thee out from Ur of
the Chaldees, to give thee this land, and that thou mightest possess
it.

15:8. But he said: Lord God, whereby may I know that I shall possess
it?

15:9. And the Lord answered, and said: Take me a cow of three years
old, and a she-goat of three years. and a ram of three years, a turtle
also, and a pigeon.

15:10. And he took all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid
the two pieces of each one against the other: but the birds he divided
not.

15:11. And the fowls came down upon the carcasses, and Abram drove them
away.

15:12. And when the sun was setting, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and
a great and darksome horror seized upon him.

15:13. And it was said unto him: Know thou beforehand that thy seed
shall be a stranger in a land not their own, and they shall bring them
under bondage, and afflict them four hundred years.

15:14. But I will judge the nation which they shall serve, and after
this they shall come out with great substance.

15:15. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace, and be buried in a
good old age.

15:16. But in the fourth generation they shall return hither: for as
yet the iniquities of the Amorrhites are not at the full until this
present time.

15:17. And when the sun was set, there arose a dark mist, and there
appeared a smoking furnace, and a lamp of fire passing between those
divisions.

15:18. That day God made a covenant with Abram, saying: To thy seed
will I give this land, from the river to Egypt even to the great river
Euphrates.

15:19. The Cineans, and Cenezites, the Cedmonites,

15:20. And the Hethites, and the Pherezites, the Raphaim also,

15:21. And the Amorrhites, and the Chanaanites, and the Gergesites, and
the Jebusites.



Genesis Chapter 16


Abram marrieth Agar, who bringeth forth Ismael.

16:1. Now Sarai, the wife of Abram, had brought forth no children: but
having a handmaid, an Egyptian, named Agar,

16:2. She said to her husband: Behold, the Lord hath restrained me from
bearing: go in unto my handmaid, it may be I may have children of her
at least. And when he agreed to her request,

16:3. She took Agar the Egyptian her handmaid, ten years after they
first dwelt in the land of Chanaan, and gave her to her husband to
wife.

To wife. . .Plurality of wives, though contrary to the primitive
institution of marriage, Gen. 2.24, was by divine dispensation allowed
to the patriarchs: which allowance seems to have continued during the
time of the law of Moses. But Christ our Lord reduced marriage to its
primitive institution. Matt. 19.

16:4. And he went in to her. But she perceiving that she was with
child, despised her mistress.

16:5. And Sarai said to Abram: Thou dost unjustly with me: I gave my
handmaid into thy bosom, and she perceiving herself to be with child,
despiseth me. The Lord judge between me and thee.

16:6. And Abram made answer, and said to her: Behold thy handmaid is in
thy own hand, use her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai afflicted
her, she ran away.

16:7. And the angel of the Lord having found her, by a fountain of
water in the wilderness, which is in the way to Sur in the desert,

16:8. He said to her: Agar, handmaid of Sarai, whence comest thou? and
whither goest thou? And she answered: I flee from the face of Sarai, my
mistress.

16:9. And the angel of the Lord said to her: Return to thy mistress,
and humble thyself under her hand.

16:10. And again he said: I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, and it
shall not be numbered for multitude.

16:11. And again: Behold, said he, thou art with child, and thou shalt
bring forth a son: and thou shalt call his name Ismael, because the
Lord hath heard thy affliction.

16:12. He shall be a wild man: his hand will be against all men, and
all men's hands against him: and he shall pitch his tents over against
all his brethren.

16:13. And she called the name of the Lord that spoke unto her: Thou
the God who hast seen me. For she said: Verily, here have I seen the
hinder parts of him that seeth me.

16:14. Therefore she called that well, the well of him that liveth and
seeth me. The same is between Cades and Barad.

16:15. And Agar brought forth a son to Abram: who called his name
Ismael.

16:16. Abram was four score and six years old when Agar brought him
forth Ismael.



Genesis Chapter 17


The Covenant of circumcision.

17:1. And after he began to be ninety and nine years old, the Lord
appeared to him: and said unto him: I am the Almighty God: walk before
me, and be perfect.

17:2. And I will make my covenant between me and thee: and I will
multiply thee exceedingly.

17:3. Abram fell flat on his face.

17:4. And God said to him: I am, and my covenant is with thee, and thou
shalt be a father of many nations.

17:5. Neither shall thy name be called any more Abram: but thou shalt
be called Abraham: because I have made thee a father of many nations.

Abram. . .in the Hebrew, signifies a high father: but Abraham, the
father of the multitude; Sarai signifies my Lady, but Sara absolutely
Lady.

17:6. And I will make thee increase exceedingly, and I will make
nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

17:7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and between
thy seed after thee in their generations, by a perpetual covenant: to
be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee.

17:8. And I will give to thee, and to thy seed, the land of thy
sojournment, all the land of Chanaan, for a perpetual possession, and I
will be their God.

17:9. Again God said to Abraham: And thou therefore shalt keep my
covenant, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

17:10. This is my covenant which you shall observe between me and you,
and thy seed after thee: All the male-kind of you shall be circumcised.

17:11. And you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, that it may
be for a sign of the covenant between me and you.

17:12. An infant of eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
every manchild in your generations: he that is born in the house, as
well as the bought servant, shall be circumcised, and whosoever is not
of your stock:

17:13. And my covenant shall be in your flesh for a perpetual covenant.

17:14. The male whose flesh of his foreskin shall not be circumcised,
that soul shall be destroyed out of his people: because he hath broken
my covenant.

17:15. God said also to Abraham: Sarai thy wife thou shalt not call
Sarai, but Sara.

17:16. And I will bless her, and of her I will give thee a son, whom I
will bless, and he shall become nations, and kings of people shall
spring from him.

17:17. Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, saying in his heart:
Shall a son, thinkest thou, be born to him that is a hundred years old?
and shall Sara that is ninety years old bring forth?

17:18. And he said to God: O that Ismael may live before thee.

17:19. And God said to Abraham: Sara thy wife shall bear thee a son,
and thou shalt call his name Isaac, and I will establish my covenant
with him for a perpetual covenant, and with his seed after him.

17:20. And as for Ismael I have also heard thee. Behold, I will bless
him, and increase, and multiply him exceedingly: he shall beget twelve
chiefs, and I will make him a great nation.

17:21. But my covenant I will establish with Isaac, whom Sara shall
bring forth to thee at this time in the next year.

17:22. And when he had left off speaking with him, God went up from
Abraham.

17:23. And Abraham took Ismael his son, and all that were born in his
house: and all whom he had bought, every male among the men of his
house: and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin forthwith the
very same day, as God had commanded him.

17:24. Abraham was ninety and nine years old, when he circumcised the
flesh of his foreskin.

17:25. And Ismael his son was full thirteen years old at the time of
his circumcision.

17:26. The self-same day was Abraham circumcised and Ismael his son.

17:27. And all the men of his house, as well they that were born in his
house, as the bought servants and strangers, were circumcised with him.



Genesis Chapter 18


Angels are entertained by Abraham. They foretell the birth of Isaac.
Abraham's prayer for the men of Sodom.

18:1. And the Lord appeared to him in the vale of Mambre as he was
sitting at the door of his tent, in the very heat of the day.

18:2. And when he had lifted up his eyes, there appeared to him three
men standing near to him: and as soon as he saw them, he ran to meet
them from the door of his tent, and adored down to the ground.

18:3. And he said: Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, pass not
away from thy servant.

18:4. But I will fetch a little water, and wash ye your feet, and rest
ye under the tree.

18:5. And I will set a morsel of bread, and strengthen ye your heart,
afterwards you shall pass on: for therefore are you come aside to your
servant. And they said: Do as thou hast spoken.

18:6. Abraham made haste into the tent to Sara, and said to her: Make
haste, temper together three measures of flour, and make cakes upon the
hearth.

18:7. And he himself ran to the herd, and took from thence a calf, very
tender and very good, and gave it to a young man, who made haste and
boiled it.

18:8. He took also butter and milk, and the calf which he had boiled,
and set before them: but he stood by them under the tree.

18:9. And when they had eaten, they said to him: Where is Sara thy
wife? He answered: Lo she is in the tent.

18:10. And he said to him: I will return and come to thee at this time,
life accompanying, and Sara, thy wife, shall have a son. Which when
Sara heard, she laughed behind the door of the tent.

18:11. Now they were both old, and far advanced in years, and it had
ceased to be with Sara after the manner of women.

18:12. And she laughed secretly, saying: After I am grown old, and my
lord is an old man, shall I give myself to pleasure?

18:13. And the Lord said to Abraham: Why did Sara laugh, saying: Shall
I, who am an old woman, bear a child indeed?

18:14. Is there any thing hard to God? According to appointment I will
return to thee at this same time, life accompanying, and Sara shall
have a son.

18:15. Sara denied, saying: I did not laugh: for she was afraid. But
the Lord said: Nay; but thou didst laugh.

18:16. And when the men rose up from thence, they turned their eyes
towards Sodom: and Abraham walked with them, bringing them on the way.

18:17. And the Lord said: Can I hide from Abraham what I am about to
do:

18:18. Seeing he shall become a great and mighty nation, and in him all
the nations of the earth shall be blessed?

18:19. For I know that he will command his children, and his household
after him, to keep the way of the Lord, and do judgment and justice:
that for Abraham's sake, the Lord may bring to effect all the things he
hath spoken unto him.

18:20. And the Lord said: The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is multiplied,
and their sin is become exceedingly grievous.

18:21. I will go down and see whether they have done according to the
cry that is come to me; or whether it be not so, that I may know.

I will go down, etc. . .The Lord here accommodates his discourse to the
way of speaking and acting amongst men; for he knoweth all things, and
needeth not to go anywhere for information. Note here, that two of the
three angels went away immediately for Sodom; whilst the third, who
represented the Lord, remained with Abraham.

18:22. And they turned themselves from thence, and went their way to
Sodom: but Abraham as yet stood before the Lord.

18:23. And drawing nigh, he said: Wilt thou destroy the just with the
wicked?

18:24. If there be fifty just men in the city, shall they perish
withal? and wilt thou not spare that place for the sake of the fifty
just, if they be therein?

18:25. Far be it from thee to do this thing, and to slay the just with
the wicked, and for the just to be in like case as the wicked; this is
not beseeming thee: thou who judgest all the earth, wilt not make this
judgment.

18:26. And the Lord said to him: If I find in Sodom fifty just within
the city, I will spare the whole place for their sake.

18:27. And Abraham answered, and said: Seeing I have once begun, I will
speak to my Lord, whereas I am dust and ashes.

18:28. What if there be five less than fifty just persons? wilt thou
for five and forty destroy the whole city: And he said: I will not
destroy it, if I find five and forty.

18:29. And again he said to him: But if forty be found there, what wilt
thou do? He said: I will not destroy it for the sake of forty.

18:30. Lord, saith he, be not angry, I beseech thee, if I speak: What
if thirty shall be found there? He answered: I will not do it, if I
find thirty there.

18:31. Seeing, saith he, I have once begun, I will speak to my Lord:
What if twenty be found there? He said: I will not destroy it for the
sake of twenty.

18:32. I beseech thee, saith he, be not angry, Lord, if I speak yet
once more: What if ten shall be found there? And he said: I will not
destroy it for the sake of ten.

18:33. And the Lord departed, after he had left speaking to Abraham:
and Abraham returned to his place.



Genesis Chapter 19


Lot, entertaining Angels in his house, is delivered from Sodom, which
is destroyed: his wife for looking back is turned into a statue of
salt.

19:1. And the two angels came to Sodom in the evening, and Lot was
sitting in the gate of the city. And seeing them, he rose up and went
to meet them: and worshipped prostrate to the ground.

19:2. And said: I beseech you, my lords, turn in to the house of your
servant, and lodge there: wash your feet, and in the morning you shall
